# This is my reflection on The Education Commons Project

Our first meeting as a group took place in the Education Commons on November 18th. There, we assigned each others’ roles for the project and brainstormed initial ideas for our assignment. As we were assigned to work with Textiles, we came up with the following ideas: mapping the frequency of certain words in The Umpire, making a web design where nodes were represented with nails and threads wrapping around them, and making nodes be a patched visual representation of certain words and sew the lines connecting them. We ended up settling on a similar idea, namely the mapping of certain words and concepts that depicted the inmates’ lives in Eastern State, and the relationship between these words. We came up with several words and concepts and Justin, our Digital Asset Manager, created concept maps from the content in The Umpire. Among our biggest inspirations for the project was the Gracie Mitchell Runaway Quilt Project (http://runawayquiltproject.org/). This project depicted the data of quilting activity for Gracie Mitchell, a former slave, in different sized nodes that were connected. (Picture 1)

Justin made 4 concept maps, with us choosing the 4th one as the best option for the design. The maps were made by mapping word correlations, meaning how often certain words appear next to other words and their distance. The first map was very convoluted and messy, due to the sheer amount of information being processed. For the next iterations, Justin settled on the most important concepts and words to make them less messy. The 4th and final map is a more simplified version that also puts the concepts into a hierarchy, with the most salient concepts being in the middle and the related words pointing out. (Pictures 2 and 3)

Our second meeting took place on Thursday, November 21st at 9pm, through Zoom. In this meeting, my role as Design Facilitator really came into focus. We bounced around ideas about how we wanted to depict Justin’s concept maps. Among the ideas shared was that, I must find a way to depict the map in a way that is more clear. The concept map, although the most clear version, was still too convoluted to simply draw directly. This meant that I would be taking certain liberties, grouping some concepts and discarding a few. We also decided I would draw the most important and central concepts, and then from these the lines would emerge to connect with the lesser concepts. It was decided that I would draw without color, as we thought the machine could only print in two colors. My job was to have a draft of the model by Saturday and send it to the group chat for critiques and corrections. I would then make a finalized version for printing on Monday in the Education Commons.

That Friday, I spent a few hours drawing out the initial model. I was a bit confused at first, but I drew a preliminary model on paper, taking notes about where I would position each concept. I was a bit stressed about trying to make the model readable and as simplified as possible, without losing the most important information about the map. I did the rough drawings using my iPad in the Procreate app, which facilitated my job as I was able to move around and resize what I had already drawn to find the best positioning possible. I worked outwards, positioning the most important concepts first and then deciding which words associated with each and where to place them. I sent the draft to the group chat on Saturday, and they approved the design. On Sunday, I uploaded a cleaner draft made in Adobe Illustrator to the group Google Doc, as well as individual files for each of the central drawings, in case those were needed for printing. (Pictures 4, 5 and 6)

That following Monday, I reached our group meeting at the Education Commons about 10 minutes late. While I had been missing, the group had found out that we could use multiple colors, so Kate, our fabricator, used her iPad to paint the icons. When I got there, multiple people in the group also shared that they felt my model was a bit too simplistic, with some some connections missing, as well as the Eastern State Band concept. I used Adobe Illustrator again to then make the final model. This model has color icons, and draws a few extra lines between concepts that I had missed in the previous drawing. I was at first daunted about the task, as I felt it might become too convoluted, but I figured out a way to have the new lines not crash with the drawings or look messy. We then printed the final model on the textile paper, and Kate hand-sewed over the lines that connected the concepts. We then all communicated over text to make sure Matthew, the Outreach Specialist, had all the information he needed for the Powerpoint presentation. We then presented in class, with each member of the group pitching in to share a bit about what we had been responsible for. (Pictures 7 and 8)

I would say that I feel our implementation was a success. Our final model was a tactile, textile representation of life at Eastern State penitentiary. Whoever holds it can run their fingers over the stitches and really connect with the ideas that we were trying to share. Overall, the project sheds light on how life in prison was depicted by the inmates themselves through The Umpire. The icons in the model show the major activities and concepts that the inmates engaged with in their daily lives, reflecting that during their incarceration they were mostly focusing on ideas and activities that centered on socializing and cultural output, and not only isolation and reform. I believe our group dynamic was good. We all pitched in with ideas and found a way to agree on tasks. Everyone performed their agreed tasks timely, and the project was executed successfully. We also communicated frequently through the group chat we made. I think if I could change something about the whole project’s process, it would be the time spent in the Education Commons. It would have been lovely to have more time to explore other technologies and methods. I also think it would have been cool to experiment with embroidery like the other textiles team did. Perhaps we could have made embroidered icons for our map, had we had more time.


!(picture 1)[/images/Picture1.png]
!(picture 2)[/images/Picture2.png]
!(picture 3)[/images/Picture3.png]
!(picture 4)[/images/Picture4.png]
!(picture 5)[/images/Picture5.png]
!(picture 6)[/images/Picture6.png]
!(picture 7)[/images/Picture7.png]
!(picture 8)[/images/Picture8.png]

