# My Digital Humanities Portfolio

Hello! And welcome to my Digital Humanities Portfolio for the ENGL 1650 Fall 2024 class.

Coming into this class, I truly had no idea what Digital Humanities was even about. I had a broad idea that I would be able to use my Computer Science skills in a History class, but no clue how those two fields would be integrated with one another. As the class progressed I found myself confronted by an incredibly expansive field that, yes, applied programming and data skills to historical research, but also had huge considerations for humanistic knowledge. This includes the way it is experienced, the way it affects those whose stories are being told and those interacting with said knowledge.

Our first project for this class was a multimedia essay that reflected on the lives of those incarcerated in Eastern State Penitentiary during the early 20th century. Our biggest source of information for these essays was The Umpire, a prison publication ran by the inmates of Eastern State. As a half-Jewish person, I decided on the topic of Judaism in Eastern State as depicted in the pages of The Umpire. I first searched any key word (such as Jewish, Jew, Rabbi, Judaism, Hebrew) in the provided newspaper data set, and saved all the pages that mentioned said key words. I then grouped them based on similar topics or authors, cropped them, and organized them into Keynote slides. I then went on to other websites or databases to try to find any other information about the inmates writing about Judaism or those mentioned in those sections. Ancestry.com was particularly useful for prison records. I then added any information I found to the corresponding Keynote slide and used these to write the multimedia essay.

While writing the essay, I found the considerations written in The Ethics of Digital Data on Convict Lives from the Digital Panopticon particularly useful. It made me aware of my purpose as a writer and the dynamics I was playing into while writing about these inmates. To quote Digital Panopticon, are we drawing “attention to the misdeeds and misfortunes of the dead…exploiting the misery of others?…Are we digitising the right records? Are we inadvertently re-enforcing the biases of the archive?” I liked some of the conclusions that Digital Panopticon reached about these questions, namely that the prison records constitute a large body of knowledge about non-elite people who lived in the past. By making these accessible, “the Digital Panopticon seeks to contribute to that wider project of recovering the lives and experiences of past generations of working people.” While it is not perfect, and lacks information on large groups such as women or people of other races, it is still a step forward in telling the stories of many that have been forgotten by the archives. As far as my own role in our project, I was hoping to shed some light on those belonging to a religious minority while in prison, which is a story not often told. So, while I was working within a limited archive, I was actively trying to look at the information in its margins. One of my shortcomings in this project, I believe, was that I should have devoted more time to uncovering more information. I was only able to find one story from another newspaper that mentioned the Jewish inmates to include in my essay. With more time, I’m sure the archive would have yielded more information.

Expanding on the archive’s limitations, I would say that throughout this class we were exposed to certain ideas about the archive, what it means for historical research, and the challenges faced by the digitization of sources. Dorothy Berry’s essay The House Archives Built explores the usage of certain language in the archives, as it pertains to the inclusion of African American narratives and the furthering of certain racist practices. About the importance of language when doing archival work, she writes that “Our descriptive systems are often the first interaction patrons have with our institutions, and when the language and systems feel alienating, patrons will take what they need and leave the rest.” This all relates to the archive’s limitations and to the challenges of digitization. Often, racist systems of the past are perpetuated when digitizing and preserving the archive, alienating many who might use them and resisting necessary change. While the readings prepared me for interaction with these themes, it wasn’t until I personally engaged with them through our class projects that their importance sinked in. Similarly to what Berry draws attention to, while searching through The Umpire, I came across several outdated and offensive references.

Another important theme explored in this class was the connection between data and design. I engaged most with these ideas when working on our second project: the textile representation of data made in the Education Commons. As part of the assignment, we were supposed to write about the process of the project’s creation and our contributions, so instead of repeating myself, I’ll link to that write-up below.

While working on this project I was reminded of a video we had watched towards the beginning of class: Giorgia Lupi’s Finding Humanity in Data. As with some of the readings I mentioned previously, I did not fully understand the relevance of her ideas until I engaged with them through the making of our projects. Her ideas on how data can be humanized through design particularly resonated with me while making the Education Commons project. In her own words, “…most of us, many of us have no use of raw data on a spreadsheet, so it’s really through design that we can shake meaningful experiences with this data in forms that we can all understand and engage with.” Through our use of textiles and a visual web, we were able to represent data in a way that engaged the senses of those interacting with the project. We strove to represent the inmates’ data in a way that showed their humanity, not just numbers or data on a screen. I truly had not thought about how important design is in the visualization of data, and as I will further expand in my Looking Forward statement, I look forward to learning more about it.

Overall, I think this class taught me that Digital Humanities is an expansive field, one that seeks to integrate multiple seemingly unrelated fields, in the hopes of finding novel ways to humanize information. All of our projects, readings and discussions, as well as the external workshops, showed me this. In this class, I found a way to incorporate several interests I had considered to be unrelated, like Computer Science, History, and Art. I look forward to further exploring this field in the future.



The following are links to other pages that detail and illustrate my time in this class:

This is a link to my [Looking Forward Statement](lookingforward.html)

This is a link to my [Multimedia Essay about Eastern State Penitentiary](https://printinginprisons.org/blog/morgana/) and this is a link to the [information I collected while making the essay.](multimediainfo.html)

This is a link to my [reflection on the Education Commons Project.](educationcommonsproject.html)

This is a link to my [reflection on a workshop in Philly.](phillyworkshop.html)

This is a link to my [reflection on a workshop at Penn.](pennworkshop.html)

